# stroke
Cleanup - We started with 5,110 subjects.  We removed any patients that did not have a BMI reading.  This was 201 records.

Strokes can occur at any age, but mainly occur in older adults.  Our dataset only had 2 patients under the age of 32 that experienced a stroke.  For this reason, we removed any patients under the age of 32.  While this might be weeding out important data,outliers can cause graphs to include wide ranges and this helps to make our charts more readable.  This removed 1,611 patients from our data.

We also removed any patients who had an unknown history of smoking.  This is an important factor in determining stroke risk.  This eliminated 629 records.

We are left with 2,669 records.

We also removed some BMI readings that were abnormally low or high.  We could not validate if these readings were correct.  For instance, one 40 year old male had a BMI reading of 11.5.  To have a BMI reading of 11.5, an average man measuring 5”7” would have to weigh 73 lbs.  Not impossible, but unlikely.  We also had a BMI reading of 92.  Our same 5’7” man would now weigh 588 to get that BMI reading.  Again, possible, but we can’t determine if this is an outlier or a mistake.  We removed any BMI below 17.6 and above 40.  This removed an additional 284 participants.

This left us with 2,385 subjects to study.


We decided not to use the glucose reading.  It may have an effect on predicting a stroke, however, this is a number that fluctuates greatly.  It would be difficult to monitor this value without administering blood tests and it is not a value that can be relied on, like height.  If you are 6’1” today, you will most likely be 6’1” tomorrow and for the rest of the year.  Your glucose is affected by what you eat and how your body metabolizes nutrients.


BMI - Body Mass Index (BMI) is a measure of body fat based on height and weight. It is calculated by dividing a person’s weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters.  BMI results are categorized as Underweight, Normal, Overweight, and Obese.  Normal range for a person who is 5’ 7” would be a BMI between 18.5 and 24.9 or 118 - 159 lbs.  Obesity is a stroke factor and a high BMI can be a measure of obesity.  Our data supports this prediction. None of the patients classified as underweight had a stroke.  Patients with a normal BMI accounted for 29 strokes.  The next category is Overweight, with a BMI range of 25 - 29.9.  The participants in the highest BMI category, Obese, made up the largest amount of stroke victims.

Gender - Male or Female.  Our data showed that 93 women experienced a stroke versus 70 men.  However, our dataset had 1,402 women and 983 men.  When you look at the percentages, our data shows 6.63% of the female participants having experienced a stroke versus 7.12% of the male participants.  While the difference is small, our data supports the theory that women have a slight advantage over men for occurrence of a stroke. 

Marriage - Our data shows that people who have never been married have an advantage over people who have been married at least once in their life.  Anyone who has been married will find this amusing, no doubt, but our numbers do not explain this factor.  Our data makes the distinction only between ever married and never married.  Other studies have shown that married people are healthier than unmarried people.  Unhappy marriages cause stress.  Marital transitions have been shown to cause stress, especially married to divorced or married to widowed.  Factors such as loss of income, loss of companionship, loss of social activity contribute to increased stress.  Women who are unemployed experiencing divorce experience higher stress than women who are employed experiencing divorce, understandably.  Some marital transitions reduce stress, which depends on individual relationships.  Some people experience grief, some people experience relief.  We found that our data would not be specific enough in a real-life study, but was sufficient to continue with our model.

Heart Disease - 21% of our patients who had a stroke also had heart disease.  Heart disease contributes a risk factor in stroke, but how?  Coronary artery disease increases your risk for stroke, because blocked arteries restricts the flow of blood to the brain.  Blood carries oxygen.  Less oxygen to the brain increases the risk of stroke.


Age - age is considered an uncontrollable factor for stroke.  A person can live a healthy lifestyle by eating a healthy diet, exercising, and not smoking.  There is nothing a person can do to stop aging.  Cosmetic procedures do not count!  Our data supported the idea that the risk of stroke increases with age.  The majority of strokes occur after the age of 65, but 10% of strokes occur in people under the age of 45.

Residence Type - our data divided our subjects into two categories for residence type - urban and rural.  There is almost no difference in our data.  In both categories, 7% of the participants experienced a stroke.  We thought about the differences in rural and urban living and how that might increase the risk of stroke.  We thought about stress, but came to the conclusion that it came down to personal preference.  Some people find living in the country to be less stressful than living in the city.  Some people find city living to be better, with more activities and social opportunities.  Although our dataset doesn’t provide this information, we also considered the types of care available to urban and rural areas.  Bigger cities mean bigger populations, which could point to more access to health care, access to newer and better facilities.  While the quality of healthcare would also affect a patient’s recovery rate after a stroke, we are looking at the factors leading up to a stroke.  The reality is that stroke incidence is higher in rural areas, but the reasons are not well understood.  Additional research is needed in this area.

Smoking status - Smoking is a well-known risk factor for stroke.  Our dataset divided the participants into four categories - never smoked, smokes, formerly smoked, and unknown.  We removed the unknown, many under the age of 16.  Our findings didn’t correlate with what is known about smoking and stroke.  Six percent of the non-smokers had a stroke, compared to 7% of the currently smoking, and 8% of the formerly smoked.  Our data lacks detail.  We don’t know when a patient started smoking, when they quit, and how many cigarettes they smoked per day.  We don’t know how much each patient inhaled.  We don’t know what type of strokes the participants suffered from.  Ischemic strokes, share similar risk factors to Coronary Heart Disease.  Hemorrhagic stroke is more prevalent in women who smoke.  Smokers tend to have reduced estrogen levels, which negatively impact the components of the lipid profile.  What we can’t determine here is if the risk associated with smoking is because of the toxins in cigarettes, or the effect it has on hormones.  Our data does not include hormones or menopausal data, but this could be important and would help explain why women of a certain age appear to have less risk for stroke.

Work type - our dataset split our patients into four categories - unemployed, self-employed, private industry, or government job.  Unemployed was filtered out due to other data being removed.  This was another factor that provided much discussion.  Out of our stroke victims, 5% worked for the government, 8% worked for themselves, and 7% worked at a private company.  Our data does not tell us how long a person worked, if they had retired, or if they enjoyed their jobs.  It seemed to be another case of personal preference.  Owning your own company and being the boss might seem nice until you realize that you’re bearing all of the risk of success or failure.  Government jobs may be stressful to one person, not stressful for the next.  Also, people change jobs so it is possible to have worked in all the categories.  Our dataset does not tell us the details on how this data was gathered.  Other studies have shown that mental stress increases a person’s risk of stroke, however our data did not measure mental stress, it simply asked about a job.  Working long hours is a risk factor too.  But what about working long hours increases the risk?  Is it added stress, or is it that working extra hours means less time for exercise, which cuts the risk of stroke.  Or could it be that working long hours means less time to plan, prepare, and eat healthy meals?  We cannot tell from this data.

Hypertension - our dataset divides hypertension or high blood pressure into two groups:  you either have it or you don’t.  In reality, there are different levels of hypertension, and low blood pressure was not considered in this study.  Our data showed that 5% of patients with normal blood pressure experienced a stroke.  Fifteen percent of the patients with high blood pressure experienced a stroke.  This aligns with accepted stroke factor knowledge.  High blood pressure can damage arteries throughout the body.  Weakened arteries in the brain puts a patient at a higher risk for stroke.  
